Adding spin test documentation (#1274)
fermyon/developer: content/spin/v2/testing-apps.md

title = "Testing Applications"
template = "spin_main"
date = "2024-05-05T00:00:01Z"
[extra]
url = "https://github.com/fermyon/developer/blob/main/content/spin/v2/testing-apps.md"

---

The `spin-test` plugin allows you to run tests, written in WebAssembly, against a Spin application (where all Spin and WASI APIs are configurable mocks).

To use `spin-test` you write test scenarios for your app in any language, with WebAssembly component support, and mock out all interactions your app has with the outside world without requiring any code changes to the app itself. That means the code you test in development is the same code that runs in production.

> Note: `spin-test` is still under active development and so the details here may have changed since this post was first published. Check [the spin-test repo](https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test) for the latest information on installation and usage.

## Prerequisites

The example below uses the [Rust programming language](https://www.rust-lang.org/) and [cargo components](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/cargo-component)(a cargo subcommand for building WebAssembly components).

## Installing the Plugin

> To run `spin-test` , you’ll first need to install the canary release of the plugin. As `spin-test` matures, we’ll be making stable releases:

Author: Thanks, in post.

```bash
spin plugin install -u https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test/releases/download/canary/spin-test.json
```

This will install the plugin which can be invoked with `spin test`.

## Creating App and Component

First, create an empty Spin app, change into that app folder and then add a component inside it:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```bash

> $ spin new -t http-empty my-component --accept-defaults

Author: Thanks, updating this in post.

$ cd my-component/
$ spin add -t http-rust my-component --accept-defaults
```

## Creating a Test Suite

We use `cargo new` to create a test suite, and then change into that `tests` directory:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```bash
$ cargo new tests --lib
$ cd tests
```

From within that test suite, we then add the spin-test SDK reference:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```bash
$ cargo add spin-test-sdk --git https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test
```

Then, we open the `Cargo.toml` file from within in the `tests` directory and edit to add the `crate-type` of `cdylib`:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```toml
[lib]
crate-type = ["cdylib"]
```

The `my-component/tests/Cargo.toml` file will look like this after editing:

```toml
[package]
name = "tests"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[lib]
crate-type = ["cdylib"]

[dependencies]
spin-test-sdk = { git = "https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test", version = "0.1.0" }
```

## Writing a Test

Next, create a test that `spin-test` can run as a compiled WebAssembly component.

> There is currently first-class support for Rust, but any language with support for writing WebAssembly components can be used as long as the `fermyon:spin-test/test` world is targeted. You can find the definition of this world [here](https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test/blob/4dcaf79c10fc29a8da2750bdaa383b5869db1715/host-wit/world.wit#L13-L16).

Author: Good call. Fixing in post.

> Here’s an example of a test written in Rust using the [Spin Test Rust SDK](https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test/tree/main/crates/spin-test-sdk) that tests to ensure that the Spin app responds properly when the key-value store has a certain key already set.

Author: Thanks, fixing this in post.

Open the `my-component/tests/src/lib.rs` file and fill it with the following content:

```rust
use spin_test_sdk::{
    bindings::{
        // fermyon::spin_test_virt::{http_handler, key_value},
        wasi::http,
    },
    spin_test,
};

#[spin_test]
fn it_works() {
    make_request();
}

fn make_request() {
    // Perform the request
    let request = http::types::OutgoingRequest::new(http::types::Headers::new());
    request.set_path_with_query(Some("/?user_id=123")).unwrap();
    let response = spin_test_sdk::perform_request(request);

    // Assert response status and body
    assert_eq!(response.status(), 200);
}
```

The following points are intended to unpack the above example for your understanding:

- Each function marked with `#[spin_test]` will be run as a separate test.

> - Each test can perform any setup to their environment by using the APIs available in `spin_test_sdk::bindings::fermyon::spin_test_virt`.

Author: Updating in post.

- Requests are made to the Spin application using the `spin_test_sdk::perform_request` function.

> - After requests are made, you can use the APIs in `spin_test_sdk::bindings::fermyon::spin_test_virt` to check how the request has changed the state of various resources (such as the key/value store) and make assertions that things changed in the way you expected.

Author: Thanks, this is being updated in post.

The test above will run inside of WebAssembly. Calls, such as Key Value storage and retrieval, never actually leave the WebAssembly sandbox. This means your tests are quick and reproducible as you don’t need to rely on running an actual web server, and you don’t need to ensure any of your app’s dependencies are running. Everything your app interacts with is mocked for you.

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line titlecase-rule -->
## Configure `spin-test`

Before you can run the test, you'll need to tell `spin-test` where your test lives and how to build it. You do this from inside our app’s manifest (the `spin.toml` file). We change back up into our application's root directory:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```bash
$ cd ..
```

Then we edit the application's manifest (the `spin.toml` file) as shown below:

<!-- @selectiveCpy -->

```toml
[component.my-component.tool.spin-test]
source = "tests/target/wasm32-wasi/release/tests.wasm"
build = "cargo component build --release"

> dir = "tests"

Reviewer: Check with Ryan - I think this is imminently to be renamed `workdir` for consistency with the Spin `build` section.

```

The whole file will look like the following:

```toml
spin_manifest_version = 2

[application]
name = "my-component"
version = "0.1.0"
authors = ["Fermyon Engineering <engineering@fermyon.com>"]
description = ""

[[trigger.http]]
route = "/..."
component = "my-component"

[component.my-component]
source = "my-component/target/wasm32-wasi/release/my_component.wasm"
allowed_outbound_hosts = []
[component.my-component.build]
command = "cargo build --target wasm32-wasi --release"
workdir = "my-component"
watch = ["src/**/*.rs", "Cargo.toml"]

[component.my-component.tool.spin-test]
source = "tests/target/wasm32-wasi/release/tests.wasm"
build = "cargo component build --release"
dir = "tests"
```

## Building and Running the Test

Finally, we're ready for our test to be run. We can do this by invoking `spin-test` from the directory where our Spin application lives:

```bash
$ spin build

> $ spin-test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ spin test
```

Author: Good catch!
Fixed in post.

## Prerequisites

Spin test requires Spin 2.5 or newer. Please [install](./install.md) or [upgrade](./upgrade.md) Spin to begin.

## Installing the Plugin

To run `spin-test` , you’ll first need to install the canary release of the plugin. As `spin-test` matures, we’ll be making stable releases:

```bash
spin plugin install -u https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test/releases/download/canary/spin-test.json
```

This will install the plugin which can be invoked with `spin test`:

## Writing a Test

Next, you'll need a test that `spin-test` can run compiled to a WebAssembly component.

There is currently first-class support for Rust, but any language with support for writing WebAssembly components can be used as long as the `fermyon:spin-test/test` world is targeted. You can find the definition of this world [here](https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test/blob/4dcaf79c10fc29a8da2750bdaa383b5869db1715/host-wit/world.wit#L13-L16).

Here’s an example of a test written in Rust using the [Spin Test Rust SDK](https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test) that tests to ensure that the Spin app responds properly when the key-value store has a certain key already set:

```rust

> use spin_test_sdk::{

Reviewer: Is there any info on the SDK (how to add to yourn project, how to use in your test code)?  (Similarly for equivalents for other languages.)

Reviewer 2: There is only an SDK for Rust at the current moment. Other languages can be used but they require raw bindings which obviously requires a bit more comfort with component model tooling.

As for more info on the Rust SDK, there isn't currently any more. As a start we can expand on this example with the following points:
* Each function marked with `#[spin_test]` will be run as a separate test
* Each test can perform any setup to their environment by using the APIs available in `spin_test_sdk::bindings::fermyon::spin_test_virt`
* To make a request to the Spin application use the `spin_test_sdk::perform_request` function
* After requests are made, you can use the APIs in `spin_test_sdk::bindings::fermyon::spin_test_virt` to check how the request has changed the state of various resources (such as the key/value store) and make assertions that things changed in the way you expected.

This is also all very new and unpolished so more than happy to make changes to `spin_test` itself to make things easier to document/teach.

Author: Thanks, @rylev. This is super helpful.

    // Configure the app's 'cache' key-value store
    let key_value = spin_test_virt::key_value::Store::open("cache");
    // Set a specific key with a specific value
    key_value.set("123", user_json.as_bytes());

    // Make the request against the Spin app
    let request = wasi::http::types::OutgoingRequest::new(wasi::http::types::Headers::new());
    request.set_path_with_query(Some("/?user_id=123")).unwrap();
    let response = spin_test_sdk::perform_request(request);

    // Assert the response status and body
    assert_eq!(response.status(), 200);
    let body = response.body_as_string().unwrap();
    assert_eq!(body, user_json);

    // Assert the key-value store was queried
    assert_eq!(
        key_value.calls(),
        vec![spin_test_virt::key_value::Call::Get("123".to_owned())]
    );
}
```

The test above will run inside of WebAssembly. The calls to the key-value store and the Spin app itself never leave the WebAssembly sandbox. This means your tests are quick and reproducible as you don’t need to rely on running an actual web server, and you don’t need to ensure any of your app’s dependencies are running. Everything your app interacts with is mocked for you.

> ## Configure Spin Test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure `spin-test`
```

> Before we can run the test, we'll need to tell `spin-test` where our test lives and how to build it. We do this from inside our app’s manifest (the `spin.toml` file). Let's imagine our app has a component named "my-component" that we want to test. In the manifest we can add the following configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can run the test, you'll need to tell `spin-test` where your test lives and how to build it. You do this from inside our app’s manifest (the `spin.toml` file). Let's imagine your app has a component named "my-component" that you want to test. In the manifest, you would add the following configuration:
```

(everything up to this point has been addressed to the reader as "you" and it was a bit disconcerting to switch to "we" with no apparent change of context)

```toml
[component.my-component.tool.spin-test]
# A relative path to where the built test component binary will live.
source = "my-test/target/wasm32-wasi/release/test.wasm"

> # A command for building the target component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# A command for building the test component.
```

> build = "cargo component build --release"

Reviewer: Should we mention that they need to install `cargo-component` for Rust?

The front matter mentioned "write tests in any language" - can we give examples of how to build tests written in our four languages?  Or link to info/examples in the spin-test repo or something

Reviewer 2: We have an example in the `spin-test` repo for [a test written in JS](https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test/tree/main/examples/test-js), but I've not made any examples yet for other languages. 

Pull requests welcome 😄

Author: Have mentioned this in the prerequisites

# The directory where the `build` command should be run.

> dir = "my-test"

Reviewer: `dir` rather than `workdir` as in the built-in build section?  Is the difference intentional?

Reviewer 2: No this is not intentional.

https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test/issues/58

Author: I will keep and eye on this and update when it is actioned.
https://github.com/fermyon/spin-test/issues/58#issuecomment-2101435216

```

## Running the Test

> Finally, we're ready for our test to be run. We can do this simply by invoking `spin-test` from the directory where our Spin application lives:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we're ready for our test to be run. We can do this by invoking `spin-test` from the directory where our Spin application lives:
```

As ever, readers will decide if they find it simple _grin_

(also per previous paragraph I'd suggest staying on "you" rather than switching to "we")

```bash
$ spin-test

running 1 test
test cache-hit ... ok

> test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.46s

Reviewer: I'd actually really like to see a _failure_ so I know how to read it.

```

## Next Steps

> `spin-test` is still in the early days of development, so you’re likely to run into things that don’t quite work yet. We’d love to hear about your experience so we can prioritize which features and bugs to fix first. We’re excited about the future of testing powered by WebAssembly components, and we look forward to hearing about your experiences as we continue the development of `spin-test`.

Reviewer: > you’re likely to run into things that don’t quite work yet

I feel like this should be mentioned in the front matter of this page.  Set expectations...!

Reviewer 2: In my draft, there's a warning at the very top (right after the first two introduction paragraphs explaining what `spin-test` is). That warning seems to have been removed. 

> Note: spin-test is still under active development and so the details here may have changed since this post was first published. Check the spin-test repo for the latest information on installation and usage.

> `spin-test` is still in the early days of development, so you’re likely to run into things that don’t quite work yet. We’d love to hear about your experience so we can prioritize which features and bugs to fix first. We’re excited about the future of testing powered by WebAssembly components, and we look forward to hearing about your experiences as we continue the development of `spin-test`.

Reviewer: "the future of testing" reads a bit hubristically for me, but that's subjective for sure.  Maybe "the potential of using WebAssembly components for testing"?

Reviewer 2: FWIW I meant for that to be parsed as "the future of WebAssembly powered testing" and not "the future of testing in general".

Author: Updated in push.
